
* On the dichotomy between "mathematically" and "computationally" optimal. 
  An example from the field of projection-based reduced-order models.

* On the importance of jointly developing "mathematical" formulation and "computational" solutions. 
  An example from the field of projection-based reduced-order models.

Abstract: 
---------

Scientific research is typically carried out by identifying a problem of interest, 
developing a (mathematical) formulation and, if analytical solutions are unfeasible, 
resorting to numerical ones. Most real world problems of relevance 
in engineering and science fall into the latter category.

Sometimes, there is a disconnect between the various stages. 
One example is when the formulation is carried out in a "bubble", 
namely without keeping into consideration the numerical solution aspect.
This "compartmentalization" can have a key limitation: a formulation is deemed 
good or bad according to metrics that are applicable to and make sense in this stage.
Any notion or conclusion about optimality drawn this way can be misleading, 
because a problem formulation that is mathematically sound and optimal (according to some metrics) 
does not directly translate into a computationally efficient solution.

In this talk, I will present one such scenario in the context of projection-based reduced-order models (pROMs).
pROMs are a class of surrogate models, namely methods aiming to replace 
expensive high-fidelity models with a lower-cost, lower-fidelity counterpart. 
To be useful, any surrogate model should meet accuracy, certification (certain guarantees 
on the error and its bounds) and speed requirements.
To reduce the number of degrees of freedom, pROMs rely on a projection process applied 
directly to the equations governing the high-fidelity model. 
A common denominator of most works on pROMs has been and still is the search for the 
smallest approximation space (e.g., number of modes) suitable for the target problem.
This has been and is motivated by the idea that "the smaller the subspace, the better".
This fits the limitation mentioned above.

In this talk, indeed, I will argue that a large subspace is (sometimes) not only 
necessary for accuracy, but can also benefit the computational efficiency.
More specifically, I will focus on linear time-invariant (LTI) systems, for which pROMs 
can be considered very mature in terms of methodological and theoretical development. 
I will discuss various aspects to support my statement, and finally show a numerical 
demonstration based on the simulation of elastic seismic shear waves.












This gap can be non-trivial, often overlooked, and can remain latent for a long period of time.
In this talk, I will use an example from the field of projection-based reduced-order models (pROMs),
to show the dichotomy between a mathematically intriguing and optimal (according to some metric) 
solution and the optimal computational solution. 

Accuracy ensures that the surrogate produces a sufficiently small error in target quantities of interest.
The maximum acceptable error is typically defined by the user and is problem dependent.
Certification ensures that the error (and its bounds) introduced 
by the surrogate can be properly quantified and characterized.
Speed ensures that the surrogate evaluates much more rapidly than the full-order model,
and, in general, there is a tradeoff between speed and accuracy.



- Filling the gap between applied math and HPC 
  (An example from projection-based reduced-order models (ROMs))

- Applied mathematicians should talk more to HPC developers
  (An example from projection-based reduced-order models (ROMs))

- Narrowing the gap between theoretical applied mathematics and HPC
  (a story from projection-based reduced-order models (ROMs))

- On the not-so-unlikley gap between theoretical applied mathematics and HPC
  (with a story on how the gap was closed for projection-based reduced-order models (ROMs))

- On the dichotomy between "the mathematically intriguing question" and "the " 

- On the dichotomy between what a mathematicians looks for vs. an HPC practitioner   
  A tale of two opinions

- A tale of two definitions of optimality.
  An example from the field of projection-based reduced-order models.

Surrogate models aim to replace expensive high-fidelity models with a lower-cost, lower-fidelity counterpart.
To be useful, surrogate models should meet accuracy, certification and speed requirements.
Accuracy ensures that the surrogate produces a sufficiently small error in target quantities of interest.
The maximum acceptable error is typically defined by the user and is problem dependent.
Certification ensures that the error (and its bounds) introduced by the surrogate can be properly quantified and characterized.
Speed ensures that the surrogate evaluates much more rapidly than the full-order model, and, in general, there is a tradeoff between speed and accuracy.

Projection-based reduced-order models (pROMs) are a class of surrogate models that rely on a projection 
process to reduce the number of degrees of freedom in the high-fidelity model. 
The key feature of pROMs is that they apply a projection process directly to the equations governing 
the high-fidelity model, thus enabling stronger guarantees. A common denominator of most previous works 
on pROMs has been to find the smallest approximation space (e.g., number of POD modes) suitable for the target problem.
This has been motivated by the idea that "a smaller subspace is preferable".

